SCHEME NAME
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana - Urban

MINISTRY
Ministry Of Housing & Urban Affairs

CATEGORIES
Housing
Loan
Rehabilitation
Sanitation
Urban


DETAILS

Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana - Urban (PMAY-U) is a scheme of the Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs (MoHUA), Government of India.

The scheme was launched to address the urban housing shortage among economically weaker sections (EWS), low income groups (LIG), middle income groups (MIG), including slum dwellers, by ensuring a pucca house to eligible urban households.

The scheme covers statutory towns as per Census 2011 and towns subsequently notified. It also provides support for affordable housing and improvement of housing conditions in urban areas.

The scheme includes provisions related to slum rehabilitation, affordable housing, credit linked subsidy and beneficiary-led individual house construction or enhancement.

Aadhaar or Virtual ID may be required for beneficiaries under the scheme.

The mission aims to provide affordable and adequate housing to eligible beneficiaries in urban areas.


BENEFITS

1. Slum Rehabilitation

Slum dwellers are provided houses using land as a resource with the participation of private developers wherever applicable.

2. Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS)

Interest subsidy is provided on housing loans to eligible beneficiaries belonging to specified income categories.

The scheme covers eligible beneficiaries under different income categories including Economically Weaker Sections (EWS), Low Income Groups (LIG), and Middle Income Groups (MIG).

3. Affordable Housing in Partnership (AHP)

Affordable housing is provided through partnerships between public and private agencies for eligible beneficiaries.

4. Beneficiary-Led Individual House Construction or Enhancement (BLC)

Eligible beneficiaries are provided assistance for construction of new houses or enhancement of existing houses.


ELIGIBILITY

1. Income Category

The family should fall under the applicable income category specified under the scheme, including:

- Economically Weaker Section (EWS)
- Low Income Group (LIG)
- Middle Income Group I (MIG-I)
- Middle Income Group II (MIG-II)

2. Ownership of Pucca House

The beneficiary family should not own a pucca house anywhere in India.

3. Definition of Family

The beneficiary family consists of the husband, wife and unmarried children.

4. Location

The beneficiary should belong to a town or city covered under the scheme.

5. Previous Government Housing Benefits

The beneficiary family should not have previously availed benefits under any housing-related scheme of the Government of India, as applicable under the scheme.


APPLICATION PROCESS

1. Eligible beneficiaries can apply for PMAY-U through the applicable application process provided by the government.

2. Applications may be submitted through the online system or through the concerned Urban Local Body (ULB) or other designated agencies.

3. The applicant must provide the required personal, family, income and other details along with the necessary documents.

4. The application is verified by the concerned authorities before the beneficiary is considered for assistance under the applicable component of PMAY-U.


DOCUMENTS REQUIRED

1. Aadhaar Card / Aadhaar Number or Virtual ID, wherever applicable.

2. Identity proof.

3. Address proof.

4. Income certificate / income-related details.

5. Bank account details.

6. Mobile number.

7. Details of family members.

8. Details related to existing house or land, wherever applicable.

9. Self-declaration or undertaking regarding ownership of a pucca house.

10. Documents required by the concerned Urban Local Body or implementing agency.

11. Additional documents as required under the applicable component of PMAY-U.

12. Other supporting documents as specified by the concerned authority.


FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS

1. What are the implementation components of PMAY-U?

Except for the component of Credit Linked Subsidy which is implemented as a Central Sector Scheme, the rest of the mission is implemented as Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS).


2. I need to know the technical specifications, construction standards of the houses/slums that will be built under this scheme?

The houses must conform to the standards provided in National Building Code (NBC) and Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS).

For a detailed description of the houses/slums, please refer Section-2 of the scheme guidelines:

https://pmay-urban.gov.in/uploads/guidelines/60180813309f2-Updated%20guidelines%20of%20PMAY-U.pdf


3. Are there any sections that would be given preference while providing the benefits?

Preference will be given to differently-abled persons, senior citizens, SCs, STs, OBCs, Minority, single women, transgender and other weaker & vulnerable sections of the society.


4. Will I still be eligible to apply for government’s ongoing or upcoming schemes if I apply for PMAY-U?

The benefits of all existing and future rural schemes will not be denied to a beneficiary solely on the grounds that she/he has availed a house under PMAY(U).


5. I am a beneficiary of PMAY (G) but I am in the permanent waitlist. What are my options?

The beneficiaries in the permanent wait list of PMAY (G) will have the flexibility for opting for a house under PMAY(G) or PMAY(U).


6. How do I know if my town is covered under the scheme?

You can visit the following website to check the same:

https://pmay-urban.gov.in/pmayprogress

Alternatively, you can visit:

https://pmay-urban.gov.in/

and head to "City Wise Progress".


7. For how long am I required to be residing in an urban area to become a beneficiary under this scheme?

The States/UTs, at their discretion, may decide a cut-off date on which beneficiaries need to be a resident of that urban area for being eligible to take benefits under the scheme.


8. Will central assistance be provided for rehabilitation of dwellers from slums built on private land?

No, slums built on private land are not covered under central assistance.


9. Is there a private entity authorised by MoHUA to collect fee from the beneficiary under PMAY-U?

No private entity/persons have been authorised by MoHUA to collect this fee from any beneficiary under this scheme.


10. How do I check my application status?

There are two ways in which the applicant can check his/her application status.

Method-1: Using Assessment ID.

Step 1:
Log on to the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana website:

http://pmaymis.gov.in/Track_Application_Status.aspx

or go to the "Citizen Application" option and then choose the "Check Status" button.

Step 2:
When you hit the track button, there will be two options displayed:

"By Name, Father's Name & Mobile No"

and

"By Assessment ID".

Step 3:
Choose the "By Assessment ID" option.

Step 4:
Enter the Assessment ID and Mobile Number that was assigned when the form was filled and submitted.

Step 5:
After filling in the details, click "Submit".

Step 6:
The user can view the progress of his/her application.


Method-2: Using Name, Father's Name and Mobile Number.

Step 1:
Log on to the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana website:

http://pmaymis.gov.in/

and go to the "Citizen Application" option and then choose the "Check Status" button.

Step 2:
After clicking on the "Know Your Status" button, choose the "By Name, Father's Name & Mobile No" option.

Step 3:
Provide the State, District and City details.

Step 4:
The next step is to fill in the Name, Father's name and Mobile Number.

Step 5:
Once this is done, click "Submit".

Step 6:
Once this is done, the status can be viewed.


SOURCE

Government of India - myScheme

https://www.myscheme.gov.in/schemes/pmay-u

Official PMAY-U Website

https://pmay-urban.gov.in/
